the main kind of antidepressant that is
the most popularly prescribed are the
SSRIs these are medicines that that
increase serotonin transmission and when
you start to push on the doses of these
SSRIs you start to lose some sort of
quintessential feminine things first of
all it becomes much harder to climax and
it becomes much much harder to cry but
you also see decreases in empathy
insensitivity in passion the simple way
of thinking about an SSRI is that you
have two brain cells and one is a
picture and one is a catcher so pitch
catch pitch catch so this nerve cell is
throwing serotonin across and this one
is catching it what the medicines do is
they block the recycling back into the
pitcher so you know I'm throwing I'm
throwing some of this gets caught some
of it gets dropped it just doesn't get
over there but I'll suck it back in and
try again so if you block the recycling
more is in the middle to get across so
there's more you know the space between
the nerve cells is called the synapse if
you block the recycling of the serotonin
into the releasing cell more is
available for the catching cell so it
ends up enhancing the transmission how
enhanced serotonergic transmission
translates into feeling better and
feeling less anxious is much more
complicated but you know the simplistic
way to think about it is that if you
have higher levels of serotonin if your
transmission is better you will be more
relaxed and more happy it's a little
easier to smile it's a little harder to
cry so you know I've had patients come
to me say you know I've tried
antidepressants before but they always
made me feel like a zombie or they
didn't make me feel like myself or you
know I had a patient who said like I cut
my finger and I looked down and I saw
that it was bleeding and I saw that it
was my blood but I didn't really feel
like connected to my finger the blood
you know things like that that are
really really worrisome or I've had
patients say you know I was in the
situation where I knew I should be
crying and I couldn't cry and you know I
felt terrible that I couldn't express
that emotion to you know bond with my
friend or something like that
so these antidepressants do
scale-back a lot of expression of
emotion and feeling emotion even sort of
thinking emotional thoughts if you're
terribly depressed and you need
antidepressants to get out of bed and
function and go to work
I get it that's one thing but what I'm
worried about is more and more women
deciding to go on antidepressants
because their friends are doing it and
that's what's you know more and more
women who are at work are taking these
SSRIs so that they can not cry not get
flustered keep going forward you know I
think it's it jives with the sort of
forward momentum agenda that so many of
us have and especially in the workplace
but you know I would say at what cost
you know it is true that SSRIs can help
you get ahead and there have been really
interesting animal studies where you
know the the primates who are on SSRIs
ascended up the the dominance hierarchy
and the ones who became dominated over
got stressed out and had lower serotonin
levels so there does seem to be some
component of serotonin effecting
dominance hierarchies and you know the
ability to move ahead or to lean in so
you know I totally get that there are
advantages to being on an SSRI in the
workplace but you're going to miss out
on knowing what's right because you feel
it or being hurt by what somebody said
and showing them that you're hurt and so
that person can learn that their
behavior has emotional consequences for
other people so and it changes the whole
sort of tone of the workplace there's
going to be less accountability and less
sort of calling people on you know their
misbehavior if you're not even feeling
that anyone misbehaved when you think
about risks you know if you're really
being thorough you want to you want to
look down both tunnel you know if this
really works out well how is that if
there were if this works out badly how
is that and how would that be for me and
so when you're evaluating risk you need
to be in touch with things like fear or
vulnerability or anxiety so if you're
medicating yourself to be invulnerable
and to let things sort of flow by you
and you know oh it's so fine it's all
good
it's no problem whatever you really you
may make decisions that are riskier and
feel better about them there are other
antidepressants like there's an
antidepressant called wellbutrin which
while the makers of wellbutrin won't
really say what its mechanism of action
is it does seem that it more increases
your dopamine it's not so much of a
serotonergic antidepressant it increases
dopamine and dopamine helps you to be
motivated and to have a vector and keep
going and to be pretty headstrong so
again in that situation you may make
decisions that are potentially
disastrous you know in the same way that
somebody who is sort of hypomanic if you
think about somebody who's manic
depressive and they have ups and downs
when they're in this hypomanic up they
get some bad ideas that seem like pretty
reasonable ideas to them somebody who's
in a hypomanic episode may be more
promiscuous and make bad choices
sexually spend money that they don't
have you know there's this overinflated
sense of self and invulnerability and
you can see the same thing with somebody
who is sort of over medicated on
serotonergic medicines is damn the
torpedoes full steam full steam ahead
and sometimes those torpedoes are going
to get you so there's quite a few things
you can do that aren't prescription
medicine you know the first thing is to
really look at how you're living your
life how much sleep are you getting what
is your diet like are you moving your
body are you getting Sunshine's
sort of you know the basic things that
we as social primates should be doing
which also includes being social being
interactive and not being isolated and
withdrawn my patients who have sort of
gotten off their meds and left me for
the most part are people who have
adopted regular cardio practice where
they're exercising regularly I think
that's really important the other thing
is that you can take herbal medicines
you can take things like st. John's wort
or 5htp which is an amino acid or you
could take Sam II there is also a lot of
evidence that the ancient medicinal
plant cannabis can be used
to treat insomnia anxiety depression so
you do have other options